ARROW-17887: [R][Doc] Improve readability of the Get Started and README pages (#14514)
apache/arrow: r/vignettes/arrow.Rmd

```{r}
as.data.frame(dat)
```

When this coercion takes place, each of the columns in the original Arrow Table must be converted to native R data objects. In the `dat` Table, for instance, `dat$x` is stored as the Arrow data type int32 inherited from C++, which becomes an R integer type when `as.data.frame()` is called. 

It is possible to exercise fine grained control over this conversion process. To learn more about the different types and how they are converted, see the [data types](./data_types.html) article. 

## Reading and writing data

One of the main ways to use `arrow` is to read and write data files in
several common formats. The `arrow` package supplies extremely fast CSV reading and writing capabilities, but in addition supports data formats like Parquet and Arrow (also called Feather) that are not widely supported in other packages. In addition, the `arrow` package supports multi-file data sets in which a single rectangular data set is stored across multiple files. 

### Individual files

> When the goal is to read a single data file, there are several functions you can use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the goal is to read a single data file into memory, there are several functions you can use:
```

-   `read_json_arrow()`: read a JSON data file

In every case except JSON, there is a corresponding `write_*()` function 
that allows you to write data files in the appropriate format. 

By default, the `read_*()` functions will return a data frame or tibble, but you can also use them to read data into an Arrow Table. To do this, you need to set the `as_data_frame` argument to `FALSE`. 

In the example below, we take the `starwars` data provided by the `dplyr` package and write it to a Parquet file using `write_parquet()`

```{r}
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)

file_path <- tempfile(fileext = ".parquet")
write_parquet(starwars, file_path)
```

We can then use `read_parquet()` to load the data from this file. As shown below, the default behavior is to return a data frame (`sw_frame`) but when we set `as_data_frame = FALSE` the data are read as an Arrow Table (`sw_table`):

```{r}
sw_frame <- read_parquet(file_path)
sw_table <- read_parquet(file_path, as_data_frame = FALSE)
sw_table
```

To learn more about reading and writing individual data files, see the [read/write article](./read_write.html).

### Multi-file data sets

> When a tabular data set becomes large, it is often good practice to partition the data into meaningful subsets and store each one in a separate file. Among other things, this means that if only one subset of the data are relevant to an analysis, only one (smaller) file needs to be read. The `arrow` package provides a convenient way to read, write, and analyze with data stored in this fashion using the Dataset interface. 

Reviewer: I know this is the Multi-file section, but wonder if including that you can read+analyze a single and too-large-for-memory file here might be useful?

Author: Yeah, that's a nice thought. I'll update to use your suggested phrasing below

> When a tabular data set becomes large, it is often good practice to partition the data into meaningful subsets and store each one in a separate file. Among other things, this means that if only one subset of the data are relevant to an analysis, only one (smaller) file needs to be read. The `arrow` package provides a convenient way to read, write, and analyze with data stored in this fashion using the Dataset interface. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a tabular data set becomes large, it is often good practice to partition the data into meaningful subsets and store each one in a separate file. Among other things, this means that if only one subset of the data are relevant to an analysis, only one (smaller) file needs to be read. The `arrow` package provides the Dataset interface, a convenient way to read, write, and analyze a single data file that is larger-than-memory and multi-file data sets.
```

All the examples used in this article rely on this high-level interface.

To learn more, see the article on [package conventions](./package_conventions.html).

## Tabular data in Arrow 

A critical component of Apache Arrow is its in-memory columnar format, a standardized, language-agnostic specification for representing structured, table-like datasets in-memory. In the `arrow` R package, the `Table` class is used to store these objects. Tables are roughly analogous to data frames and have similar behavior. The `arrow_table()` function allows you to generate new Arrow Tables in much the same way that `data.frame()` is used to create new data frames:

```{r}
library(arrow, warn.conflicts = FALSE)

dat <- arrow_table(x = 1:3, y = c("a", "b", "c"))
dat
```

You can use `[` to specify subsets of Arrow Table in the same way you would for a data frame:

```{r}
dat[1:2, 1:2]
```

Along the same lines, the `$` operator can be used to extract named columns:

```{r}
dat$y
```

Note the output: individual columns in an Arrow Table are represented as Chunked Arrays, which are one-dimensional data structures in Arrow that are roughly analogous to vectors in R. 

> Tables are the primary way to represent rectangular data in-memory using Arrow, but they are not the only rectangular data structure used by the Arrow C++ library: there are also Datasets which are used for data stored on-disk rather than in-memory, and Record Batches which are fundamental building blocks but not typically used in data analysis. 

Author: Yeah that was one of my biggest points of confusion early on, exacerbated by the slightly-misleading "Arrow is about in-memory not on-disk format" framing that exists in older docs. So I've tried to orient new users to the Table/Dataset distinction early on so that they're expecting to learn more about the difference later. I think it helps!

To learn more about the different data object classes in `arrow`, see the article on [data objects](./data_objects.html).

## Converting Tables to data frames

Tables are a data structure used to represent rectangular data within memory allocated by the Arrow C++ library, but they can be coerced to native R data frames (or tibbles) using `as.data.frame()`

```{r}
as.data.frame(dat)
```

When this coercion takes place, each of the columns in the original Arrow Table must be converted to native R data objects. In the `dat` Table, for instance, `dat$x` is stored as the Arrow data type int32 inherited from C++, which becomes an R integer type when `as.data.frame()` is called. 

> In most instances the data conversion takes place automatically and without friction: a column stored as a timestamp in Arrow becomes a POSIXct vector in R, for example. However, there are some instances where the mapping between Arrow data types and R data types is not exact and care is required.

Author: That's a good point. I've expanded on it a little by highlighting the fact that POSIXct and POSIXlt objects get handled very differently, hinted at subtle differences between R factors and Arrow dictionaries and then tried to direct readers to the data types article should they want to learn more about the nuances. See what you think!

> In most instances the data conversion takes place automatically and without friction: a column stored as a timestamp in Arrow becomes a POSIXct vector in R, for example. However, there are some instances where the mapping between Arrow data types and R data types is not exact and care is required.

Reviewer 2: Ambiguity in my head totally gone now, thanks!

To learn more about data types in Arrow and how they are mapped to R data types, see the [data types](./data_types.html) article. 

## Reading and writing data

One of the main ways to use `arrow` is to read and write data files in

> several common formats. The `arrow` package supplies extremely fast CSV reading and writing capabilities, but in addition supports data formats like Parquet and Feather that are not widely supported in other packages. In addition, the `arrow` package supports multi-file data sets in which a single rectangular data set is stored across multiple files. 

Author: Okay, what I've done (in order to smooth the transition) is subtly make "Arrow format" or "Arrow IPC format" the primary terminology everywhere, but make sure it always refers to "feather" in a secondary position, either by writing "Arrow/Feather format" or "Arrow (also known as Feather)". It's kind of a soft-deprecation strategy: for the time being I want the word "feather" to be present every time the format is referred to so that people are 100% certain that the Arrow format and the Feather format are the same thing. There's enough confusion on that point already, I think. But once it becomes standard to refer to Arrow format we can probably start deprecating further in the docs?

See what you think!

> several common formats. The `arrow` package supplies extremely fast CSV reading and writing capabilities, but in addition supports data formats like Parquet and Feather that are not widely supported in other packages. In addition, the `arrow` package supports multi-file data sets in which a single rectangular data set is stored across multiple files. 

Author: lol, I have to stop using "see what you think" as my way of saying "this is what I think we should do but happy to pivot if you think we need to" 😁

> several common formats. The `arrow` package supplies extremely fast CSV reading and writing capabilities, but in addition supports data formats like Parquet and Feather that are not widely supported in other packages. In addition, the `arrow` package supports multi-file data sets in which a single rectangular data set is stored across multiple files. 

Reviewer 2: Let's loop this into the wider discussion on [ARROW-18148](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-18148) as I think this is something we need to agree on at a high-level (as it's also being discussed on the mailing list), but I fully agree that some sort of soft-deprecation strategy is needed so we don't confuse users.  I'm thinking "formerly known as" could also be an option, but let's discuss more widely first.

To learn more about Arrow Datasets, see the [dataset article](./dataset.html).

## Analyzing Arrow data with dplyr

Arrow Tables and Datasets can be analyzed using `dplyr` syntax. This is possible because the `arrow` R package supplies a backend that translates `dplyr` verbs into commands that are understood by the Arrow C++ library, and will similarly translate R expressions that appear within a call to a `dplyr` verb. For example, although the `dset` Dataset is not a data frame (and does not store the data values in memory), you can still pass it to a `dplyr` pipeline like the one shown below:

```{r}
dset %>%
  group_by(subset) %>% 
  summarize(mean_x = mean(x), min_y = min(y)) %>%
  filter(mean_x > 0) %>%
  arrange(subset) %>%
  collect()
```

Notice that we call `collect()` at the end of the pipeline. No actual computations are performed until `collect()` (or the related `compute()` function) is called. This "lazy evaluation" makes it possible for the Arrow C++ compute engine to optimize how the computations are performed. 

To learn more about analyzing Arrow data, see the [data wrangling article](./data_wrangling.html).

> 

Author: Yes, absolutely! I didn't even realise we had that page myself 😁 

I'll link to it from the data wrangling article too

> 

Reviewer 2: Thanks!  Yeah, it's super new and is generated from some funky scripts that Neal put together recently, will be getting the word out about it soon :D

Tables are the primary way to represent rectangular data in-memory using Arrow, but they are not the only rectangular data structure used by the Arrow C++ library: there are also Datasets which are used for data stored on-disk rather than in-memory, and Record Batches which are fundamental building blocks but not typically used in data analysis. 

To learn more about the different data object classes in `arrow`, see the article on [data objects](./data_objects.html).

## Converting Tables to data frames

Tables are a data structure used to represent rectangular data within memory allocated by the Arrow C++ library, but they can be coerced to native R data frames (or tibbles) using `as.data.frame()`

```{r}
as.data.frame(dat)
```

When this coercion takes place, each of the columns in the original Arrow Table must be converted to native R data objects. In the `dat` Table, for instance, `dat$x` is stored as the Arrow data type int32 inherited from C++, which becomes an R integer type when `as.data.frame()` is called. 

> In most instances the data conversion takes place automatically and without friction: a column stored as a timestamp in Arrow becomes a POSIXct vector in R, for example. However, there are some instances where the mapping between Arrow data types and R data types is not exact and care is required. As an example, Arrow does not have an analog of the POSIXlt class: date/time data expressed as POSIXlt objects will preserve the internal list structure of the POSIXlt object, but it will arrive in Arrow as a list. As a consequence users need to decide if what needs to be preserved is the timestamp (in which case it is better to coerce to POSIXlt to POSIXct before translating to Arrow), or if a POSIXlt-style list is preferable. Similar issues exist in the other direction: Arrow dictionary objects are a little more flexible than R factors, for instance. 

Reviewer 2: > date/time data expressed as POSIXlt objects will preserve the internal list structure of the POSIXlt object, but it will arrive in Arrow as a list

Please can you give me a code example for this? Asking as I opened [a ticket for a bug when converting between POSIXlt and Arrow](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-18263), and there is some weird stuff going on there, and I'm trying to work out how to get this POSIXlt -> list behaviour.

Author: Try this, maybe? 

```r
tm <- as.POSIXlt(c(Sys.time(), Sys.time()))
arrow::Array$create(tm)
```

It seems to arrive in Arrow in the expected list format. But I am not surprised that there are weird cases. For example, an R user might intuitively think you can import a single POSIXlt as a scalar type (after all, you *can* do that for a single POSIXct object), but this errors:

```r
arrow::Scalar$create(as.POSIXlt(Sys.time()))
```

I dunno. Maybe I should find a safer example than POSIXlt/POSIXct for this section? I feel like I'm skating on thin ice here because I'm not sure how much of this behaviour is desirable. Perhaps there's a better example involving the various integer types?

Reviewer 2: I don't know how much is desirable either (we should think about why it's doing it like this, and what (if anything) the alternative might look like).  Can we relegate the "weird" cases to other vignettes and keep things relatively straightforward here?  Maybe just allude to the fact that it's more complex for POSIXlt and link to where that's mentioned, or pick a simpler example for this vignette if there is one.

Thank you for surfacing this though, it's great to see these rough edges exposed.  Mind opening up a JIRA asking if this is desired behaviour? I think this warrants more discussion. Feel free to tag me in it and/or link to this comment.

Author: Okay, I've opened a jira issue here: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/ARROW-18337

In the meantime, I've simplified this passage of text. It now makes the more generic point that it's possible to customise how data types are converted, and then points the reader at the data types vignette
